[[what-is-afterglow]]
What is Afterglow?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

// Set up support for relative links on GitHub; add more conditions
// if you need to support other environments and extensions.
ifdef::env-github[:outfilesuffix: .adoc]

Afterglow is a functional lighting controller, written in
http://clojure.org[Clojure], intended to enable people to produce
spectacular light shows using modern stage and effect lighting, and
which are related in deep ways to the phrasing of music being played.
(Its http://deepsymmetry.org[creator] is a DJ and producer of light
and laser shows by avocation.) Currently, the
link:effect_functions{outfilesuffix}#effect-functions[lighting
effects] and
link:fixture_definitions{outfilesuffix}#fixture-definitions[fixture
efinitions] are written and organized through Clojure code, so you
will either need to learn Clojure or work with a Clojure programmer to
create new ones, but they are controlled through MIDI control surfaces
or Open Sound Control, so once they are set up, there is great
flexibility in how you can perform them.

Someday a user interface for building shows and fixture definitions may
be created, either within Afterglow, or as a companion project, but that
is not currently planned.

___________________________________________________________________________
Actually, that is a bit of a fib… James has an
Ableton Push and is already exploring how to build a rich interface
using its LCD display, color-changing pressure-sensitive pads, and
touch-sensitive encoders, but that is slightly separate from the main
Afterglow project.
___________________________________________________________________________

[[how-afterglow-works]]
How Afterglow Works
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The fundamental task of Afterglow is to make light shows happen. It
does this by controlling lights, communicating with them through the
https://www.openlighting.org/ola/[Open Lighting Architecture], which
can work with several kinds of control protocols, most of which are
derived from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DMX512[DMX512], or a faster
implementation of its basic ideas over Ethernet. When a show is
running, Afterglow runs a thread which periodically asks “what should
all the lights be doing now?” (resulting in a single “frame” of
control values representing that moment in time), and sends the
results of that analysis to all of the OLA universes the show is
configured to control. By default this happens thirty times each
second, but the interval is configurable within the show, and should
be decided based on the fastest refresh rate of any physical
interfaces you have hooked up to Afterglow. This is described in more
detail in the
link:rendering_loop{outfilesuffix}#the-rendering-loop[Rendering
Loop] section.

___________________________________________________________________________
In principle you could have more than one show running at a time, each
controlling a different set of OLA universes, but most people will not
need this capability.
___________________________________________________________________________


When you just create a show and call `(show/start!)`, Afterglow will
send a bunch of zero values to the show’s universes. To make
interesting things happen you add
link:effect_functions{outfilesuffix}#effect-functions[Effect
Functions] to the show. The default namespace you are put into when
you launch the Afterglow project using `lein repl` has some
link:effect_examples{outfilesuffix}#effect-examples[Example Effects]
that can help get a feel for this concept. To get a full understanding
of how to use (and create) effect functions, learn about the
link:lifecycle{outfilesuffix}#effect-function-lifecycle[Effect
Function Lifecycle].

The effect functions need to know what lights they are supposed to
control, what capabilities they have, and how they are connected (what
universe, what channels), as well as how they are arranged in space.
This is accomplished by patching
link:fixture_definitions{outfilesuffix}#fixture-definitions[Fixture
Definitions] to the show. To work with the actual lights you have
available, you will need to create fixture definitions for them,
unless they happen to be ones already available in the Afterglow
project. Since there are so many kinds of lights, with more being
created every month, that seems unlikely unless the project really
takes off… and, to that end, if you _do_ create definitions for your
lights, please contribute them to the project!

To learn how to install Afterglow and the Open Lighting Architecture,
see the project https://github.com/brunchboy/afterglow[README].

Since Afterglow was developed to create light shows for electronic
music events, it is deeply driven by the notion of musical time,
through its link:metronomes{outfilesuffix}#metronomes[Metronomes], so
it is worth learning how to configure and interact with them. It is
also designed to work with MIDI controllers, both to trigger effects,
and to synchronize with music, as described in
link:mapping_sync{outfilesuffix}#midi-mapping-and-beat-sync[MIDI
Mapping and Beat Sync].
